In this lesson, we'll continue customizing our 2022 theme site by creating a blog page that shows the
latest blog posts, you'll create a page template from scratch, adding the blog posts layout with a
sidebar from a block pattern provided by the theme.
And make sure the header and footer is included on the page by the end of this video.
You'll see how you can add a brand new template that you can use on any page.
Let's go back and work with the 2020 theme a little bit more and get to know the template site editor
and template parts to create some different customizations on our website.
So log back into the sandbox and go to the dashboard where you've got your 2022 theme that we've been
working on activated.
And let's go ahead and right click Visit Site, and I'll open it in another tab, and let's just review
what we have here.
We've got a home page that shows a particular header that's exclusive to the home page, and it's showing
the latest posts in reverse chronological order in a kind of full width layout with big featured images
and titles that are clickable to the blog posts and a standard footer.
And then we got three subsequent pages.
The About page uses a very large header with an image and an a big heading, as well as a block pattern
that shows a grid of blog posts.
And then there's a view all button that we created.
And we also have a call to action with potentially a room for an opt in form right here and that standard
footer.
Once again, the event page, if you remember, we created a special template that eliminates the page
title.
And again, the kind of standard header and footer on there.
And finally, a landing page without a header for the film page, which has a different background color.
And we also set up a footer which is actually embedded in the page content with that matching background
color and a menu item at the bottom with the home link.
And so the first thing we'll do is go back into the site dashboard and let's open up appearance editor
once again and take a look at what we have and what we've customized so far.
So since I was on the homepage, it opens that up first and we can look at templates.
You can see that I created and hopefully you created a new template with that was called Page No title.
The rest are templates provided by the 2022 theme.
And then there are four template parts that are a header and a footer and then a header.
Two other header options the dark small header and the dark large header that are incorporated into
existing templates.
And so for this next project, let's go in and for the site here, let's create a blog page that has
its own sidebar, something that's different from a full width blog post layout here and also different
from what we have on the about page with that grid layout.
And so if we go back into the site dashboard, one thing we can start with if we want to create a blog
page.
And this will be called that blog archive because it's going to list the last three posts or last series
of posts in reverse order.
Plus, we'll provide a sidebar that we can customize for that page.
And so I'll go to pages all pages and I don't have a blog archive page created yet.
So I'm just going to add a new page and we can call a blog and and I'll go ahead and publish that page
for now.
So it's saved.
And then over here, we don't have a blog page template, and that's what we're going to be creating
in this lesson.
So let's click new and we're going to create a custom template called blog and just hit create.
And now what we have here is, you know, kind of a standard template.
It doesn't show anything except the page title.
There's nothing in the content area.
It has, you know, a header that doesn't really look right.
And then there's no footer on there, either.
So I'm going to click Update and what I'd like to what I like to do is get out of this kind of, you
know, template editing screen that's within a particular page and click back and then I'll click the
logo at the top left again to get back out to the to the WordPress dashboard.
And so now I can go to appearence editor, and that new template should appear in my templates list
if I click the logo again and then under editor click templates.
Now I have a blog template created by me, and I can click blog there to take a look at it in the in
the blog template editing screen.
So now I have some resources I can use.
Like this list?
View right here to see what's already existing as a part of this template, as well as this plus button
or over here, as you remember, I.
Can get two blocks and patterns.
And also, we have patterns to choose from here.
And we're going to utilize this to create this blog post archive template with a sidebar.
And so first of all, I'm going to just close that and open the list view again.
And you know, this header is the wrong type of header.
And so really the first thing I'll do is just I can select that and I'm going to go ahead and bring
in a header pattern.
And it just says there's the default header right up at the top and it creates it right here.
And you can see that it's already added blog, and we're going to discuss that later in this section
where this is actually bringing in.
We just close that right here and look at the list view that's bringing in just a page list.
So every page that's within the site is going to be listed up here in the navigation and we'll customize
that later.
But for now, I just brought in a group, which is my page header.
Of course, I have this extra group up here, which I could just click the three dots and remove that
group.
So now I have a standard header right up at the top of my blog post archive page.
Just click Save and Save.
And then when we go down to the next section, we've got, you know, just post title and post content,
whether that's a page or a post, this is just going to bring in whatever it is, you know, the single
title and content for that page.
But what we need is a query loop with the blog posts there.
But what we want to do is, you know, put a sidebar in there.
And so, you know, I have this group selected right here.
Doesn't matter really what I have selected.
We can always move it around, but I'm going to click.
Plus, I'm going to look at patterns and let's use the explorer window so that they're a little bit
bigger.
And in 2022, under pages, I know that there's a number of different page designs that we can use,
and we're going to leverage that in order to do what we need right here towards the bottom.
You can start to see what we have now.
Here is a list of blog posts with a left sidebar.
Here's a list of blog posts with a right sidebar, which is what I had in mind.
So I'm just going to click that.
And now this is looking pretty good, isn't it?
It's already pulling in the three posts that we already have with their featured images, and it has
a sidebar on the right side.
It's got a few different sections.
It's got a list of categories.
It's got a list of tags.
And it has, you know, there's an image at the very top, the name of the site and the tag line of
the site.
And we can just leave that as it is for now.
Just below here now you can see that it's actually brought in its own header, which doesn't contain
the page title.
So I'll go back to the list view so I can figure out what I'm controlling here, and I could see that
within this group that was in the block pattern.
It's got its own navigation.
I'm just going to go ahead and get rid of that.
So I'll just go to that row and go to the three dots and remove that group.
So now I also have a spacer right here that I probably don't need doesn't look like I need that space,
or so I'll take that out.
And now this is looking pretty good.
OK.
So what else do we have down here on the page?
We also have this left over separator line.
Let's go to the bottom and look at what that is down here, separator and then a group which is the
old post title and post content.
So I'm going to get rid of the separator.
I'm going to get rid of this whole group.
And at the bottom, we also do need a page footer down here.
So don't forget you can add a block right here.
You can go and say, now, is there going to be a footer block when I start to search for a block over
here within the editing area?
It does give me a few options.
It'll give me a template part.
It'll give me a footer.
And then there's some blocks that come with the theme footer with the logo and the citation and footer
with the navigation and the citation.
And so what is it that we want to use?
It's kind of up to us.
We could use a template part that already exists.
And what that means is that when we have that template part here, it can be used on multiple pages
of the site.
And so if I want to edit the footer template part that is site wide, it'll change it on every page
of the website, including this blog archive page.
So right down here, you could either either create a new template part or let's choose an existing
one.
And so for the area of the footer, there's just one footer template part.
If you remember and there's three header ones, let's just use the footer template part, which is that
standard template part and that's been inserted in the page now.
And so from here, I think I have a nice looking blog archive page.
We'll click Save Save again because it's just verifying that we're going to save to the page template.
And let's go back to the WordPress dashboard.
We can go up here and let's let's refresh the home page.
And as you remember, it added another page link right here, and this is going to open up our blog
page.
And now we have a nice header and we have, you know, a great archive page.
The footer looks great, but there's something wrong with the header, isn't there.
We need some spacers in there, I believe.
So let's go back.
Let's just fix that very quickly.
Go back into the the site, Ed, and what we want are the templates, and we're editing this blog archive
and you could see that it's kind of busted up here in what I might do is go back.
And so this group right here is kind of messed up.
If I just select that group, I might just go ahead and add a I'm going to just add the header as a
template part the same way that I did before.
And so let's see.
I just start typing header.
I can add a template part.
Let's choose an existing template part and we're going to put the standard header in there that looks
much better.
So this group up here I can oh, I put it actually within that group.
So it's this group here.
Remember, the blue line shows what you're editing.
And so I'm going to go ahead and remove the old header there.
Now that's looking right.
Let's see what it looks like on the front end.
If I save that.
Much better.
Yeah, that's what it looks like.
Let's see if I go back to the homepage.
There is something different.
This is actually stretched out to the outside.
How's it look on the event page?
Yeah, stretched out to the outside, but I look at the blog page now this is it's not all the way to
the outside.
So there's one more thing we need to fix.
This group right here does go to the outside, but the header itself looks like it's not stretched to
the outside.
Yeah, so if I click that block, let's see what I can find.
Maybe we want to inherit.
No, we don't want to inherit the default layout that kind of messed it up, didn't it?
And so this is sometimes there are things there's the footer things that you.
That you need to kind of play with and figure out.
Yeah, so let's see.
You know, I'm going to go back.
Let's close that oops.
Let's go back to the list view here, and I think it's this group that I had previously messing me up.
So, you know, I could just add that template part in again instead of having it be within the group
using this plus sign.
I mean, go ahead and use this plus sign and let's see.
If I just start typing template, I'm going to put a template part in here now that's outside of this
group.
This probably will work much better.
Yes, there we go.
Choose an existing template part.
Let's choose the traditional header.
Yeah, it does look a little bit messed up, doesn't it?
But let's see how how that's going to work for us and we'll get rid of this group at the top.
And let's see what else is happening here.
So this is going to this, it affects pages and it affects the blog template, but it also affects the
header template part.
But that does look messed up, doesn't it?
Well, here's what we can do.
I have an idea.
We'll save that.
And now let's go back and look at the template parts and this header.
We really didn't want to change that, the template parts.
And so we'll clear the customizations right there.
Now we might be able to go back into the.
Into the blog.
There we go.
Much better, I have it.
I have the the header looking right and a sidebar as a part of the blog archive page.
Now there's one more thing you might have noticed about the blog page here, and that is that the content
is extending outside of the content container.
That is kind of a standard width on all the other pages right here on the event page, you can see and
on the about page, the content container is a particular width, right?
And so let's look at that blog page again.
You can see that while the header is at the right with the content of the blog archive page is extending
outside, and that's something that's just a design choice.
But let's go ahead and try to fix that.
Let's go to the blog template once again and just take a look at what we have here.
So this group?
We might want to inherit the default layout because here we have content width.
It's either, you know, content in pixels and wide customize the width for all elements that are assigned
to the center or the wide columns.
So I have a group and then there's a set of columns right here.
And of course, this block pattern has two columns and we can adjust the spacing and everything as we
will.
But as far as this group, let's see what happens if I inherit the default layout and then save.
This is just an experiment.
There it was.
So that's inheriting the layout and the right width.
And now we have the right with great.
That's something that you can play with and get back to where you like.
So I've saved that.
I'll go and get outside of the site editor again, and we're in a nice place.
Now let's go to the about page next and we'll check out this view all button and make that point to
our new blog archive page.